It is a benediction of nature that generally we remember more vividly
and oftener what has given us happiness rather than what has given us
pain. Christmas in particular is the time for recollecting, and now I
am recollecting Christmases even more remote in character from modern
Christmases than they are in time.

We lived on a ranch twenty-seven horse miles from our “shopping
center.” That was Beeville, Texas, which later became the family
home. Three or four times a year a wagon went to town and hauled out
supplies, but the biggest haul was just before Christmas.

As I look back, those days seem to have been days of great
plenitude--not because of anything like family prosperity, for we lived
meagerly, but because of the necessity of local stockpiling. Sugar came
in barrels, molasses in kegs or big jugs, flour in barrels or in tiers
of 48-pound sacks, beans and coffee in bushel sacks (the coffee to be
roasted and ground), lard in 50-pound cans, tomatoes, salmon, and other
canned goods in cases. Then at Christmas time there was a large wooden
bucket of mixed candy--enough for us six children, for our visiting
cousins, and for the children of several Mexican families living on the
ranch, most of them farmers. Each of these families received also a new
blanket and a sack of fruit.

We had home-made candy not infrequently, but Christmas was the only
time of year when it snowed candy. There were no chocolates, as I
recollect--just a mixture of lemon drops and an assortment of variously
shaped hunks of sugar, both hard and gummy, variously colored, alloyed,
and flavored, with peppermint being dominant.

Christmas was also distinguished by apples, oranges, raisins (on
stems), almonds, walnuts, pecans, and a coconut or two. We ate some
of the coconut as broken out of the shells, but its main function was
to be grated and mixed with sliced oranges and sugar into ambrosia--as
inevitable for Christmas dinner as turkey is for Thanksgiving. Nobody
then dreamed of having fruit every morning for breakfast. Oranges,
apples, raisins, and nuts were put into stockings and hung on Christmas
trees. They were a rare treat.

These fruits and nuts left a stronger impression on my mind than
all other gifts associated with childhood Christmases except books,
firecrackers, Roman candles--and my first new saddle. There were tin
bugles, toy trains, and dolls for the girls, but we--the boys, at
least--had so much fun making our own toys that no bought toy has left
any impression on my memory. Christmas was the time for new pocket
knives, and very useful they were. My father taught us to whittle
water-wheels, which could be run only when an occasional rain made
Long Hollow run. The axle for the wheel might be a piece of wood or a
section of dried cornstalk, less durable but much more easily fitted
with paddles than hard wood. The toy bugles would not split the air as
brightly as cane whistles whittled out of an old fishing pole.

We may have had colored balloons at some Christmas, but I recollect
only the ones made from bladders. Hog-killing time is cold weather.
The chief prize for us from every hog and every calf, cow, or steer
butchered was the bladder. A human mouth was the only air-pump for
blowing up this home-contrived balloon. Held, air-expanded, near a
fire, it would keep on expanding until the material was very thin and
dry. Then came the climax--an explosion. Nobody wanted to part with his
bladder-balloon, but that grand explosion could not be resisted.

I never heard of Fourth of July fireworks until I was nearly grown.
Firecrackers and Roman candles were as much a part of Christmas as
ambrosia. The firecrackers could be set off by day, but the Roman
candles were for darkness, when everybody watched the pyrotechnics.
They vanished all too quickly, like most other beautiful things--but
not from the great reality called memory.

[Illustration]

There were toy pistols and airguns, but a new pair of rubbers for a
nigger-shooter gave just as much satisfaction. At one time we got
more satisfaction from lead bullets gouged out of live oak trees than
from any other form of shooting. Our house was on the edge of a grove
of scores of live oak trees, some of them very large and old. When
Uncle Ed Dubose, my mother’s half brother, came in the fall to hunt and
again at Christmas time with all the family, he freely spent ammunition
perfecting his marksmanship. His targets were tree trunks. He was
an indefatigable treasure-hunter also, but he never found a bonanza
comparable to that he left us children in the form of lead.

From it, from solder melted off tin cans, and from now and then a haul
of babbitt found in wornout windmills, we minted dollars. We melted
our metal in a large iron spoon over an outdoor fire and poured the
liquid into a round wooden bluing box, wherein it quickly cooled and
solidified. (Bluing for laundry in those days came in powdered form,
for dissolving in water--in wooden boxes, with tops that screwed on,
about the diameter of a dollar.) This free coinage was limited only by
the supply of crude metal. The more canned goods we consumed and the
more old bullets we could find, the higher the rate of coinage. The two
principal uses the dollars had were for pitching--into holes in the
ground--and for buying cattle, horses, sheep, and goats from each other.

Each of us had a play ranch enclosed by miniature fences--twine (our
barbed wire) strung on sticks stuck into the ground like posts. Our
cattle were tips of horns that had been sawed off cattle at the chute
in the big picket cowpens about a hundred yards from the house. Our
horses were spools from which my mother and neighbors had used the
thread in endless sewing; our goats were empty snail shells; our sheep
were oak galls. Sheep and goats were very plentiful and, therefore, had
a low value; cattle and horses were harder to come by.

With running irons made of baling wire and heated red hot in a fire,
we branded the cattle, sheep, and horses, but could not brand the
snail-shell goats. We made long trains of flat rectangular sardine
cans, coupled together by pieces of wire, to haul the stock from ranch
to ranch. Our dog, Old Joe--named after Beautiful Joe, the wonderful
hero of a favorite book--made a very unsatisfactory engine to pull
the freight train. We hitched green lizards, snared with the hair of
horsetail, to a single sardine can or to a cardboard matchbox that
served as a wagon. Lizards never make tractable teams.

This ranching, with all of its ramifications, was not primarily
Christmas play. It went on more in the summer than in the winter, but
no Christmas toys could compete with it. Certain Christmas books added
to prolonged play.

We children always knew positively that there would be books on the
Christmas tree or in our stockings. We always wanted particular titles,
and we had the before-Christmas pleasure of speculating on what known
and unknown books Santa Claus might bring. I don’t remember what
Christmas it was that _Ivanhoe_ came to make knights of us boys. Old
Stray, an irritatingly gentle horse that could hardly be forced out
of a walk, enriched the flowering of our knighthood. _Swiss Family
Robinson_ made us into cave-dwellers. We dug our own cave into the bank
of Long Hollow, some distance below the house.

I wasn’t yet reading when for Christmas I received an illustrated book,
with a linen cover, about an owl that hooted. On demand my father read
it aloud over and over. We could hear owls hooting in the live oaks
many nights of the year, and my father could talk owl talk. Every time
he read the book he had to tell us what the owl says, in words long
drawn out from deep down: “I cook for myself. Who cooks for you-all?”
There are very few conversationalists to whom I had rather listen than
to a hoot owl, and often to this day his lonely and beautiful _who-ing_
takes me back to a Christmas of childhood, to a child’s book, and to my
father’s voice.

There were no commercial Santa Clauses in the country, so far as I
know. The only Santa Claus for us was my father. At an early age I
learned his identity, but that knowledge had no effect on the great
illusion, any more than knowing that a grown woman could not literally
live in a shoe had on the Mother Goose fact that there was an old woman
who lived in a shoe--and she had so many children she didn’t know what
to do.

My father cut the Christmas tree out in the pasture--a comely live oak
or maybe a “knock-away” (_anacahuita_)--and brought it in secretly.
After it was hung with gifts and lighted with little colored candles
and we had all gathered to behold it, Santa Claus would bound in, all
in white and red, as cheery in his ruddy complexion, reindeer country
manners, other-world talk, and contagious spirits as the Saint
Nicholas of “The Night before Christmas.” In disguised voice he called
out the names on the packages and added joy to the gift in the way he
presented it. Then he would disappear, and presently Papa would come in
and claim his own presents with as much eagerness as we had received
ours.

“The gift without the giver is bare.” Gifts can be manufactured, some
beautiful, many useful, but giving-out feelings can’t be--though they
can be cultivated. The love and cheer associated with Christmas will
always be the best thing about it. How often just a good word that
conveys the word-giver’s generosity of spirit enriches people! I
remember the “Merry Christmas, sir!” of a gray-haired woman scrubbing
stone steps at a college in Cambridge, England, during the war; and
recollection of her sturdy, cheerful, kind nature brightens my world. I
can hear my mother’s “Christmas Gift” or “Merry Christmas” as I write
these words. Whoever heard her greeting received a gift, for she meant
every syllable of it, felt every tone in it.

Sunrise, starlight, silence of dusk are never trite. Generous feelings
and cheering words are never trite. Merry Christmas!



